Bifurcation kit extension (#707)
SciML/Catalyst.jl: docs/src/catalyst_applications/bifurcation_diagrams.md

# [Bifurcation Diagrams](@id bifurcation_diagrams)

> Bifurcation diagrams describes how, for a dynamic system, the quantity and quality of its steady states changes with a parameter's value[^1]. These can be computed through the [BifurcationKit.jl](https://github.com/bifurcationkit/BifurcationKit.jl) package. Catalyst provides a simple interface for creating BifurcationKit compatible `BifurcationProblem`s from `ReactionSystem`s. If you use this feature in your research, please [cite the BifurcationKit.jl](@ref bifurcation_kit_citation) and [Catalyst.jl](@ref catalyst_citation) publications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bifurcation diagrams describe how, for a dynamical system, the quantity and type of its steady states change as a parameter is varied[^1]. When using Catalyst-generated models, these can be computed with the [BifurcationKit.jl](https://github.com/bifurcationkit/BifurcationKit.jl) package. Catalyst provides a simple interface for creating BifurcationKit compatible `BifurcationProblem`s from `ReactionSystem`s. If you use this feature in your research, please [cite the BifurcationKit.jl](@ref bifurcation_kit_citation) and [Catalyst.jl](@ref catalyst_citation) publications.
```

> This tutorial briefly introduces how to use Catalyst in conjecture with BifurcationKit through basic examples, with BifurcationKit.jl providing [a more extensive documentation](https://bifurcationkit.github.io/BifurcationKitDocs.jl/stable/). Especially for more complicated systems, where careful tuning of algorithm options might be required, reading the BifurcationKit documentation is recommended. Finally, BifurcationKit provides many additional features not described here, including [computation of periodic orbits](https://bifurcationkit.github.io/BifurcationKitDocs.jl/stable/periodicOrbit/), [tracking of bifurcation points along secondary parameters](https://bifurcationkit.github.io/BifurcationKitDocs.jl/dev/branchswitching/), and [bifurcation computations for PDEs](https://bifurcationkit.github.io/BifurcationKitDocs.jl/dev/tutorials/tutorials/#PDEs:-bifurcations-of-equilibria).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial briefly introduces how to use Catalyst with BifurcationKit through basic examples, with BifurcationKit.jl providing [a more extensive documentation](https://bifurcationkit.github.io/BifurcationKitDocs.jl/stable/). Especially for more complicated systems, where careful tuning of algorithm options might be required, reading the BifurcationKit documentation is recommended. Finally, BifurcationKit provides many additional features not described here, including [computation of periodic orbits](https://bifurcationkit.github.io/BifurcationKitDocs.jl/stable/periodicOrbit/), [tracking of bifurcation points along secondary parameters](https://bifurcationkit.github.io/BifurcationKitDocs.jl/dev/branchswitching/), and [bifurcation computations for PDEs](https://bifurcationkit.github.io/BifurcationKitDocs.jl/dev/tutorials/tutorials/#PDEs:-bifurcations-of-equilibria).
```

## Basic example
For this example, we will use a modified version of the model from Wilhelm (2009)[^2] (which
demonstrates a bistable switch as the parameter *k1* is varied). We declare the model using Catalyst:
```@example ex1
using Catalyst
wilhelm_2009_model = @reaction_network begin
    k1, Y --> 2X
    k2, 2X --> X + Y
    k3, X + Y --> Y
    k4, X --> 0
    k5, 0 --> X
end
```
Next we will create a `BifurcationProblem`. In addition to the `ReactionSystem`, we need to provide:
- The bifurcation parameter (the parameter which is varied in the bifurcation diagram).
- A full model parameter set. This includes the values of all non-bifurcation parameters, but also a value for the bifurcation parameter (which correspond to the point in parameter space from which the computation of the bifurcation diagram starts).

> - An initial guess of the steady state values of the system at the provided parameter set. Using this point as a start, BifurcationKit uses Newton's method to find an initial steady state from which to compute the bifurcation diagram. Hence, this guess does not need to be very exact (but may be important if the system exhibits multistability for the initial parameter set).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An initial guess of the steady state values of the system at the provided parameter set. Using this point as a starting guess for root finding, BifurcationKit calculates an initial steady state from which to compute the bifurcation diagram. Hence, this guess does not need to be very exact (but may be important if the system exhibits multistability for the initial parameter set).
```
It is more sophisticated than plain Newton's Method I think, so probably better to not get into that level of detail.

> - The species which concentration we wish to plot on the y-axis of the bifurcation diagram (alternatively, a custom value can be provided by using the [`record_from_solution` argument](https://bifurcationkit.github.io/BifurcationKitDocs.jl/stable/periodicOrbit/#.-record*from*solution)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The species or statistic we wish to plot on the y-axis of the bifurcation diagram (a custom value can be provided by using the [`record_from_solution` argument](https://bifurcationkit.github.io/BifurcationKitDocs.jl/stable/periodicOrbit/#.-record*from*solution)).
```
Does this work with symbolic expressions? If we can intercept this to make it work with symbolic expressions that would be cool. (Maybe a good followup PR and issue?)

Author: Wouldn't work out of the bat. We could make a routine which takes a symbolic expression and generates a function. Long-term, I think BifurcationKit is the place for a lot of stuff like this. E.g. if it could use `NonlinearSystem`s internally it could just use all the nonlinear solvers from NonlinearSolve.jl (instead of implementing its own). It would also be possible to track the name of the bifurcation parameter and use that in the plots (instead of just calling it `p`).

> We combines all this information to form a `BifurcationProblem`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We combine all this information to form a `BifurcationProblem`:
```

```@example ex1
using BifurcationKit
bif_par = :k1
u_guess = [:X => 5.0, :Y => 2.0]
p_start = [:k1 => 4.0, :k2 => 1.0, :k3 => 1.0, :k4 => 1.5, :k5 => 1.25]
plot_var = :X
bprob = BifurcationProblem(wilhelm_2009_model, u_guess, p_start, bif_par; plot_var=plot_var)
nothing # hide
```

> BifurcationKit computes bifurcation diagrams using the `bifurcationdiagram` function. From an initial point in the diagram, it tracks the solution (using a continuation algorithm) until the entire diagram is computed (BifurcationKit's continuation can be used for other purposes, however, this tutorial focuses on bifurcation diagram computation). The continuation settings are provided in a `ContinuationPar` structure. In this example, we will only specify three settings, `p_min` and `p_max` (which sets the minimum and maximum values over which the bifurcation parameter is varied) and `max_steps` (the maximum number of continuation steps to take as the bifurcation diagram is tracked). We wish to compute a bifurcation diagram over the interval *(2.0,20.0)*, and will use the following settings:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BifurcationKit computes bifurcation diagrams using the `bifurcationdiagram` function. From an initial point in the diagram, it tracks the solution (using a continuation algorithm) until the entire diagram is computed (BifurcationKit's continuation can be used for other purposes, however, this tutorial focuses on bifurcation diagram computation). The continuation settings are provided in a `ContinuationPar` structure. In this example, we will only specify three settings, `p_min` and `p_max` (which sets the minimum and maximum values over which the bifurcation parameter is varied) and `max_steps` (the maximum number of continuation steps to take as the bifurcation diagram is tracked). We wish to compute a bifurcation diagram over the interval `(2.0,20.0)`, and will use the following settings:
```

Author: Was meant to be a mathematical formula, will witch to $$ (think this was written before you told me to use that instead of **)

```@example ex1
p_span = (2.0, 20.0)
opts_br = ContinuationPar(p_min = p_span[1], p_max = p_span[2], max_steps=1000)
nothing # hide
```

Finally, we compute our bifurcation diagram using:
```@example ex1
bif_dia = bifurcationdiagram(bprob, PALC(), 2, (args...) -> opts_br; bothside=true)
nothing # hide
```

> Where `PALC()` designates that we wish to use the pseudo arclength continuation method to track our solution. The third argument (`2`) designates the maximum number of recursions when branches of branches are computed (branches appear as continuation encounter certain bifurcation points). For diagrams with highly branches structure (rare for most standard chemical reaction networks) this input is important. Finally, `bothside=true` designates that we wish to perform continuation on both sides of the initial point (which is typically the case). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where `PALC()` designates that we wish to use the pseudo arclength continuation method to track our solution. The third argument (`2`) designates the maximum number of recursions when branches of branches are computed (branches appear as continuation encounters certain bifurcation points). For diagrams with highly branched structures (rare for many common chemical reaction networks) this input is important. Finally, `bothside=true` designates that we wish to perform continuation on both sides of the initial point (which is typically the case). 
```

Author: Still want to use `most common` though. As in I think it is the case for the majority of CRNs, and this just suggest that one should not be surprised not to see a highly branched structure in a CRN (rather than that one should expect it, but correct me if I am wrong)

We can plot our bifurcation diagram using the Plots.jl package:
```@example ex1
using Plots
plot(bif_dia; xguide="k1", yguide="X")
```

> Here, the steady state concentration of *X* is shown as a function of *k1*'s value. Stable steady states are shown with thick lines, unstable ones with thin lines. The two fold bifurcation points are marked with "bp".

Reviewer: Can we make "fold bifurcation point" a reference to a webpage that describes type of bifurcations?

Author: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saddle-node_bifurcation

## Additional `ContinuationPar` options

> Most of the options required by the `bifurcationdiagram` function is not provided directly, but instead provided through the `ContinuationPar` structure. For full details, please read the [BifurcationKit documentation](https://bifurcationkit.github.io/BifurcationKitDocs.jl/dev/library/#BifurcationKit.ContinuationPar). However, a few common options, and how they affect the continuation computation, are described here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the options required by the `bifurcationdiagram` function are provided through the `ContinuationPar` structure. For full details, please read the [BifurcationKit documentation](https://bifurcationkit.github.io/BifurcationKitDocs.jl/dev/library/#BifurcationKit.ContinuationPar). However, a few common options, and how they affect the continuation computation, are described here:
```

> - `p_min` and `p_max`: Sets the interval over which the bifurcation diagram is computed (with the continuation stopping if it reaches these bounds).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `p_min` and `p_max`: Set the interval over which the bifurcation diagram is computed (with the continuation stopping if it reaches these bounds).
```

- `newton_options`: Options for the Newton's method that BifurcationKit uses to find steady states. This can be created using `NewtonPar(tol = 1e-9, max_iterations = 100)` which here sets the tolerance (to `1e-9`) and the maximum number of newton iterations (to `100`).

The previous bifurcation diagram can be computed, with these various options specified, in the following way:
```@example ex1
p_span = (2.0, 20.0)
opt_newton = NewtonPar(tol = 1e-9, max_iterations = 1000)
opts_br = ContinuationPar(p_min = p_span[1], p_max = p_span[2], 
                          dsmin = 0.001, dsmax = 0.01, max_steps = 1000,
                          newton_options = opt_newton)
bif_dia = bifurcationdiagram(bprob, PALC(), 2, (args...) -> opts_br; bothside=true)
nothing # hide
```
(however, in this case these additional settings have no significant effect on the result)

## Bifurcation diagrams with disjoint branches
Let's consider the previous case, but instead compute the bifurcation diagram over the interval *(2.0, 15.0)*:
```@example ex1
p_span = (2.0, 15.0)
opts_br = ContinuationPar(p_min = p_span[1], p_max = p_span[2], max_steps = 1000)

> bif_dia = bifurcationdiagram(bprob, PALC(), 2, (args...) -> opts_br; bothside=true)

Reviewer: Maybe we should suggest to Romain a dispatch that if a `ContinuationPar` is passed directly as the fourth argument he just directly build the `(args...) -> opts_br` function? This would make things easier on users.

Author: agreed

Author: Hopefully this will happen soon-ish: https://github.com/bifurcationkit/BifurcationKit.jl/issues/132

plot(bif_dia; xguide="k1", yguide="X")
```

> Here, in the bistable region, we only see a single branch. The reason is that the continuation algorithm start at our initial guess (here made at *k1 = 4.0* for *(X,Y) = (5.0,2.0)*) and tracks the diagram from there. However, with the upper bound set at *k1=15.0* the bifurcation diagram have a disjoint branch structure, preventing the full diagram from being computed by continuation alone. In this case it could be solved by increasing the bound of *k1=15.0*, however, this is not possible in all cases. In these cases, *deflation* can be used. This is described in the [BifurcationKit documentation](https://bifurcationkit.github.io/BifurcationKitDocs.jl/dev/tutorials/tutorials2/#Snaking-computed-with-deflation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, in the bistable region, we only see a single branch. The reason is that the continuation algorithm starts at our initial guess (here made at `k1 = 4.0` for `(X,Y) = (5.0,2.0)`) and tracks the diagram from there. However, with the upper bound set at `k1=15.0` the bifurcation diagram has a disjoint branch structure, preventing the full diagram from being computed by continuation alone. In this case it could be solved by increasing the bound from `k1=15.0`, however, this is not possible in all cases. In these cases, *deflation* can be used. This is described in the [BifurcationKit documentation](https://bifurcationkit.github.io/BifurcationKitDocs.jl/dev/tutorials/tutorials2/#Snaking-computed-with-deflation).
```
Please don't use italic blocks (i.e. stars), either use code or math blocks as appropriate. I'm going to stop commenting on this, but please take a pass and update the tutorial to use one of these two.

Author: will do
(as mentioned this was before you told me about the $$, and I failed to go back and look at the old tutorials, I agree ** shoudln't be used in these cases as there are better alts)

## Systems with conservation laws

> Some systems are under-determined, and for a given parameter set they have an infinite number of possible steady states, preventing bifurcation diagrams from being computed. Similar to when we [compute single steady states](@ref homotopy_continuation_conservation_laws), we can utilise Catalyst's ability to detect and eliminate conservation laws to resolve this issue. This requires us to provide information of the species concentrations at which we wish to compute the bifurcation diagram. These are provided to the `BifurcationProblem` using the `u0` argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some systems are under-determined determined at steady-state, so that for a given parameter set they have an infinite number of possible steady state solutions, preventing bifurcation diagrams from being computed. Similar to when we [compute steady states for fixed parameter values](@ref homotopy_continuation_conservation_laws), we can utilise Catalyst's ability to detect and eliminate conservation laws to resolve this issue. This requires us to provide information of the species concentrations at which we wish to compute the bifurcation diagram (to determine the values of conserved quantities). These are provided to the `BifurcationProblem` using the `u0` argument.
```

> To illustrate this, we will create a simple model of a kinase that is produced and degraded (at rates *p* and *d*). The kinase facilitates the phosphorylation of a protein (*X*), which is dephosphorylated at a constant rate. For this system, we will compute a bifurcation diagram, showing how the concentration of the phosphorylated protein (*Xp*) depends on the degradation rate of the kinase (*d*). We will set the total amount of protein (*X+Xp*) to *1.0*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To illustrate this, we will create a simple model of a kinase that is produced and degraded (at rates $p$ and $d$). The kinase facilitates the phosphorylation of a protein ($X$), which is dephosphorylated at a constant rate. For this system, we will compute a bifurcation diagram, showing how the concentration of the phosphorylated protein ($Xp$) depends on the degradation rate of the kinase ($d$). We will set the total amount of protein ($X+Xp$) to $1.0$.
```

```@example ex2
using BifurcationKit, Catalyst, Plots
kinase_model = @reaction_network begin
    (p, d), 0 <--> K
    (K*kP,kD), X <--> Xp
end

u_guess = [:K => 1.0, :X => 1.0, :Xp => 1.0]
p_start = [:p => 1.0, :d => 0.5, :kP => 2.0, :kD => 5.0]
u0 = [:X => 1.0, :Xp => 0.0]
bprob = BifurcationProblem(kinase_model, u_guess, p_start, :d; plot_var=:Xp, u0=u0)

p_span = (0.1, 10.0)
opts_br = ContinuationPar(p_min = p_span[1], p_max = p_span[2], max_steps = 1000)
bif_dia = bifurcationdiagram(bprob, PALC(), 2, (args...) -> opts_br; bothside=true)
plot(bif_dia; xguide="d", yguide="Xp")
```

> This bifurcation diagram does not contain any interesting features (such as bifurcation points), and only shows how the steady state concentration of *Xp* is reduced as *d* increases. For this example, we will note two facts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This bifurcation diagram does not contain any interesting features (such as bifurcation points), and only shows how the steady state concentration of $Xp$ is reduced as $d$ increases. For this example, we will note two facts:
```

> - When providing the concentrations for computing the conserved quantities (in `u0`), we only have to designate the concentrations of species that are actually involved in conservation laws. For larger systems, determining which one are may, however, be difficult. In this case, it might still be wise to provide concentrations for all species.

Reviewer: We could add a function to return what species appear in a conservation law. We already store the independent and dependent species and the conservation laws so it would be easy to calculate.

Reviewer: Why not just make the guess be `u0` and then extract the vector that is needed to pass into BifurfactionKit?

Author: Because people might not make steady state guesses that fulfil their desired conservation law (e.g. just putting all numbers equal to `1`, I usually do that).

Author: yeah, adding extra functionality to conservation laws would be good.

> - The steady state guess in `u_guess` does not actually have to fulfil the conserved concentrations provided in `u0`.

Reviewer: Is this really true? Can you add an explanation of the difference between `u_guess` and `u0` here and how they are both used?

Author: `u_guess` is just a guess of the initial steady state.

`u0` is used to compute conservation laws (e.g. what the conserved quantity X1+X2 should be). Yes, it is annoying to have to have both, but feel like if we just use `u_guess` people will do something trivial (like `ones`), and never realise that it is used for conserved quantities computation.

Author: rewritten this to make everything extra clear

!!! note

>     Computing bifurcation diagrams for [hierarchical models created using compostability](@ref compositional_modeling), that also contain conservations laws, is currently not supported. For these, please [flatten](@ref api_network_extension_and_modification) the system first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Computing bifurcation diagrams for [hierarchical models created by composing multiple systems](@ref compositional_modeling), that also contain conservations laws, is currently not supported. For these, please [flatten](@ref api_network_extension_and_modification) the system first.
```
Why is this not supported? Conversion to ODEs/Nonlinear systems flattens anyways.

Author: because of the conservation law error check

## Basic example
For this example, we will use a modified version of the model from Wilhelm (2009)[^2] (which
demonstrates a bistable switch as the parameter $k1$ is varied). We declare the model using Catalyst:
```@example ex1
using Catalyst
wilhelm_2009_model = @reaction_network begin
    k1, Y --> 2X
    k2, 2X --> X + Y
    k3, X + Y --> Y
    k4, X --> 0
    k5, 0 --> X
end
```
Next we will create a `BifurcationProblem`. In addition to the `ReactionSystem`, we need to provide:
- The bifurcation parameter (the parameter which is varied in the bifurcation diagram).

> - A full model parameter set. This includes the values of all non-bifurcation parameters, but also a value for the bifurcation parameter (which correspond to the point in parameter space from which the computation of the bifurcation diagram starts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A full model parameter set. This includes the values of all non-bifurcation parameters, but also a value for the bifurcation parameter (which corresponds to the point in parameter space from which the computation of the bifurcation diagram starts).
```

bif_dia = bifurcationdiagram(bprob, PALC(), 2, (args...) -> opts_br; bothside=true)
plot(bif_dia; xguide="d", yguide="Xp")
```
This bifurcation diagram does not contain any interesting features (such as bifurcation points), and only shows how the steady state concentration of $Xp$ is reduced as $d$ increases. 

Finally, for additional clarity, we reiterate the purpose of the two `u` arguments used:
- `u_guess`: A guess of the initial steady states (which BifurcationKit uses to find its starting point). Typically, most trivial guesses work (e.g. setting all species concentrations to `1.0`). `u_guess` *does not* have to fulfil the conserved concentrations provided in `u0`.
- `u0`: Used to compute the concentrations of any conserved quantities (e.g. in our example $X + Xp = 1.0$). Technically, values are only required for species that are involved in conservation laws (in our case we do not need to provide a value for $K$). However, sometimes determining which species are actually involved in conservation laws can be difficult, and it might be easier to simply provide concentrations for all species.

!!! note

>     Computing bifurcation diagrams for [hierarchical models created by composing multiple systems](@ref compositional_modeling), that also contain conservations laws, is currently not supported. For these, please [flatten](@ref api_network_extension_and_modification) the system first.

Reviewer: I thought we had discussed this. What isn't working here? Conversion to a nonlinear system should already flatten implicitly.

Author: fixed
